All right.
Come in and have a seat.
We're going to start now.
And again, this is probably one of the more challenging topics, even for me to speak on.
I speak on a lot.
It's never easy.
If I'm going to deal with this topic, sometimes when I'm at a church, the car starts having to rental car has problems.
The hotel has problems.
The church tech has problems.
The devil really does not like for this subject to be broached.
Again, we have to be prayerful.
So let's just get right into it.
The scripture for this is third session, Matthew five and verse 27 says, you've heard that it was said by them of old time, thou shall not commit adultery.
But I say unto you that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her has committed adultery with her already in his heart.
So our message for this third session is,
the new drug, pornography, and sex addiction.
Let's pray.
Father God, we thank you for this opportunity to study a word and to deal with these challenging issues.
I am asking in a special way, Lord, for Holy Ghost power.
I ask again, Lord, that you just make me a nail on the wall, a rusty, sorry nail, Lord.
But upon that nail, I ask that you hang a portrait of Jesus Christ.
Let me not be seen or heard, Lord.
Instead, Father, let us hear a word from the throne room of grace.
This is our prayer in Jesus' name, amen.
All right, come on in, have a seat.
And here's where we're gonna go.
If you have your Bible, you wanna jump to 2 Samuel chapter 11, 2 Samuel chapter 11.
And I will read, the Bible says, and it came to pass after the years was expired at the time when kings go forth to battle that David sent
Joab and his servants with him and all Israel and they destroyed the children of Ammon and with siege of Rama But David tarried still at Jerusalem So before we get into this subject of sexual addiction pornography David is David David's the guy who killed Goliath David's the guy who to when he would return from battle with Saul the women would sing David has killed his of Saul has killed his thousands
But David has killed his tens of thousands.
But here now we see David idle.
He's supposed to be in battle, leading the people as the king.
And instead he's back at the palace.
Verse two.
And it came to pass in the eventide that David arose from off his bed and walked upon the roof of the king's house.
And from the roof he saw a woman washing herself.
And the woman was very beautiful to look upon.
The story gets interesting.
He's home.
He gets off his bed.
Now, you know, David had many women, wives.
So he probably may have even gotten off a bed with one of his wives.
The Bible says David goes to the roof of the palace, looks off the roof and sees a woman there washing herself.
The Bible says she was very beautiful to look upon.
This is a rooftop experience, but not the good kind.
David sees this woman and he is instantaneously attracted to the woman.
The Bible says that he sent and inquired after the woman and once said, is not this Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, one of David's counselors, the wife of Uriah the Hittite, one of his main soldiers.
They're like, wait a minute, don't you know who this woman is?
Her father is someone you know.
Her husband is someone you trust.
Do you realize who you're talking about?
And the Bible says, and David sent messengers and took her.
And she came in unto him and he lay with her for she was purified from her uncleanness.
That means the bath that she was doing at the beginning of the story was the bath that would happen after a woman would come off her monthly cycle.
It was a statement that she could be, she was often
more fertile, if I have time I'll get into that, and also her desire levels might be higher.
And so she was purified of her uncleanness and she returned onto her house.
Now look at verse five.
A lot of men don't want to hear this one.
And the woman conceived and sent and told David and said, I am with child.
Can you imagine the shock that ran through King David?
Here's a man who brought down a giant with a stone
And all it took for him to be brought down was for him to look inappropriately at a woman.
So for us, the smartphone has brought in digital rooftops.
You have a way to stand on the roof like he did and look out and see what you ought not see.
And you don't have to climb on top of your house.
You no longer have to be a peeping Tom.
You don't have to go to the store and buy girly magazines.
All of it can be done with a simple device.
Digital rooftop.
Now, how does this happen?
How do people go into these forms of sin?
It is often connected to a societal problem.
Ezekiel 1649 says, behold, this was the iniquity of your sister Sodom.
What was the number one sin of Sodom?
Pride.
Isn't that interesting?
fullness of bread and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters.
Neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.
She was idle.
They were laying around on their bed up on a rooftop like David when they were supposed to be doing something.
Look at verse 50.
And they were hearty and committed abomination before me.
A Bible then God says, therefore I took them away as I saw good pride and idleness leads to abomination.
the practice of abomination.
So what has changed in society?
Sex is so overtly.
Now I don't have time to get into it, but we know there was something they call the sexual revolution.
Changed the way everybody looked at it.
In fact, it made it so that basically trying to describe sex to you as if it's just a physical activity, like going to play ball or do gymnastics.
Trying to make sex not sacred.
And in that process, many have been deceived
Why is the intimate act of sexual relations sacred?
Because it is the only way God designed for procreation to happen.
Now, what happened over time?
Here you go.
Lifestyle changes in the world.
This is puberty trends.
And this is up to 2,000, but you can see Germany, France, United States.
You go back far enough.
Young girls would not start menarchy.
Menarchy is the age at which a girl has her first period.
It would not happen till they were over 16 years of age.
If you go back far enough, how old would a young lady be when she got married, 17, 18, 16, some places?
So by the time she was able to have children, she was getting married.
Her desire, hormonal desire matched about that time.
Over time, what's happened is the age of onset of puberty has fallen precipitously so that today in America,
The average age a girl starts menarchy has menarchy is 12 years old.
The average age for African American girls is nine years old.
So it changes everything, right?
So you say, man, these girls look more like women than girls.
That's true.
Something has actually changed.
And so the development happens earlier.
What delays this development?
Well, we know less body fat.
It's the fat cells lept in at release.
is released that triggers the body to go into puberty.
And so that's one of the things that has changed.
So that goes back to kind of the modern standard American diet, Western diet.
So those things have changed.
Exposure to sexual content might stimulate this to start earlier.
If you've ever had chickens and you put chickens under lights, the chickens make eggs faster, sooner, right?
So some have argued maybe it's the electrical lights that everybody's always under lights now.
I don't know if that's true, but it's an interesting theory.
In fact, I said that at a Jamaican church, where most of the people were Jamaican here in the States, but a predominantly Jamaican church.
I said that in church, I was talking about how some people think of the electric lights, and the Jamaican man stood up, started storming out of church.
A woman said to him, where you going?
He said, I'm going home, I'm going to cut off the lights, I have tree daughters.
But it's not just girls, right?
And let me make sure I make this clear.
As you go into puberty, it is a sign that you are able to reproduce or coming towards the age of where you can reproduce.
What happens is with that has to come the hormones that drive sexual desire.
You get that?
So when you lower the age, you lower when that can start to happen.
Throw in what Hollywood does, throw in what the music does, and you can see that the young brains
because just because the body is developing, the brain is not accelerated into adulthood, right?
So now you, by the time some are 16, 17, 15 even, they've got an adult body instilling with a child's mind.
Not just a girl.
It happened.
It's happening to the boys as well.
Boys are starting puberty much sooner.
That also means that it means testosterone levels are shooting up.
That means sex drive is happening earlier, right?
And so this, this is a study from the UK and the US.
African-American boys, white boys, it doesn't matter what group, how you do it at the end of the day, the trend is toward younger and younger, right?
So that's one of the things that's changing pretty rapidly.
Now, what is also changing is, so while on the one hand, the age at which you might first start having some sort of sexual desire is coming down because puberty is coming down, the age at which you can biblically fulfill
that desire in terms of people getting married is going up.
So the devil has set up a trap.
I hope you get this.
If I can drop the age where you start having desire, but then by societal pressure and means, raise the age at which you actually get married.
He lives you in a years of your most, you know, strongest years of your youth with some of your strongest drives where biblically you have nowhere to, nothing to do with it.
And so you see the trend of this shooting up.
It is, it's not healthy.
So what the devil does, remember stress equals demands minus resources.
He begins now to try and give you some false resources to fill that hole, to fill that gap, right?
And here's one of them, pornography.
Now I have talked to young men who are not interested in actually dating a real woman because they say all their sexual desires are fulfilled with watching pornography.
They don't need a real person.
So they can, they'll wait as long as they want to wait to get married.
Right?
And I've talked to young ladies.
It was interesting because someone asked me this before the break.
I've talked to young ladies that say that one young lady told me she was not going to get married.
She wasn't worried about finding a husband because everything she needed was fulfilled in these erotic novels that she read.
Dread.
She don't read them no more.
But she would just read the novels and everything she needed was in the pages of the novel.
She didn't need a man.
The man she needed or wanted was in the pages of the book.
You can get wrapped up in all of this.
So early exposure to pornography is a form of sexual trauma.
This is from the Journal of Psychiatry Reform.
This is a children's commission.
It says a lot of it is actually just abuse, young people and pornography.
Look at what this article says.
This is a teacher and writes throughout my career as a school leader,
I've witnessed a harmful impact of pornography on young people.
I will never forget the girl who told me about her first kiss with her boyfriend age 12 who strangled her.
He had seen it in pornography and thought it normal.
Let me be absolutely clear to teacher continues.
Online pornography is not equivalent to a top shelf magazine like back in the days before you had all these smartphones and stuff.
The adult content which parents may have accessed in their youth
could be considered quaint in comparisons to today's world of online pornography.
Depictions of degradation, sexual coercion, aggression, and exploitation are commonplace and disproportionately targeted against teen girls.
In fact, pornography is one of the few places where conservative Christians, feminists, and non-religious young men converge to agree that it is bad.
All three.
Feminists, if you read, I've read a lot of what feminists say on it, and they're brilliant.
They make a lot of great points.
They talk about, just by doing this, you actually train young men to objectify women.
A young man who watches pornography can, for the rest of his life, be restricted to see a woman simply as a collection of body parts.
To be used singularly for his pleasure.
Pornography that everyone says is so harmless,
actually changes the way you see other people.
Right?
And so feminists, the young men, I'll talk more about that, but the young men don't like it because when they, there's a whole movement against it by young men in America in the 30s and 40s, they say they got exposed to this stuff when they were kids.
And now as adults, they want to be happily married.
And because of the damage porn is done, they simply cannot be happily married with a one real woman.
The fantasy is more important than anything.
The teacher continues in the article.
I am deeply concerned about the normalization of sexual violence in online pornography and the role that this plays in shaping children's understanding of sex and relationships.
We find that pornography exposure is widespread and normalized to the extent that children cannot opt out.
The average age at which children first see pornography is 13.
by age 9, 10% have seen pornography.
27% had seen it by age 11, and half of children who had seen pornography had seen it by age 13.
Different type of an attack on children.
Never forget this.
And any of you in here who are single and may have a family one day, let me give you a spiritual warfare warning.
Once you can have children and you begin to have kids,
Satan's entire focus is on destroying your children.
That becomes his whole game.
It's to destroy your children because one day I just told this young man, this was expected a child.
I was talking to a young man just this week.
I said, one day you're going to have to stand before God and the God of the universe is going to ask you, what did you do with the children I gave you?
How did you raise the children I loaned you?
This young age, and obviously, this messes kids up.
When you see this young, I have some slides from the UK about kids and seeing pornography.
It becomes violent, quick at that age.
They quickly move from the regular stuff to really heinous stuff, and it shapes them.
The way they treat each other, how they date later on, all has changed.
I show this study a lot in my talks as well, but I wanted to highlight it again here.
This is from the Christian Post.
It says, the majority of practicing Christians admit to viewing porn
And look at the last part there.
Many are comfortable with the habit.
Let's look at the numbers.
In general, 75% of Christian men and 40% of Christian women reported consuming pornography on some level.
The number that shocks most people here isn't the 75% of men.
It's the 40% of women.
And so we know that, and again, this is in churches, not just our denomination, across Christendom.
This is the numbers.
Now watch this.
Despite the church's stance against lust generally, it seems little progress has been made to determine many of those who fill the pews from pornography consumption, specifically, researchers said in the article.
The gap between professed beliefs and actual behavior raises questions about the efficacy of current approaches within faith communities.
And I have to say growing up, nobody really explained this stuff.
I grew up in Avenue Church.
Nobody said nothing except don't bring no girl home pregnant or to the girls don't get pregnant.
Sex is too complicated to reduce it to that.
Somebody's got to explain to you as a child that God invented sex.
He's the one who made it, and it can be enjoyed if you follow his precepts.
In fact, if you follow his precepts, that's how it is most enjoyable.
I'll show you some science on that in a second, right?
So, what may be more troubling is that well over half of Christians who use pornography say they are comfortable with their pornography use.
The reality for those who struggle in the church is they too often feel like they are alone.
Interesting.
Christians, more than half of the ones who use pornography are comfortable with its use.
We read 2 Timothy 3 and verse 5 earlier today.
It says that they have having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.
When you are in sin and you say, you know what?
I'm okay with being in sin.
I accept that I'm in sin.
I'm not asking God to help me out of this sin anymore.
You have denied the power.
Right?
You've denied the power specifically of the Holy Spirit when you do that.
When I asked who was helping you with your struggle with pornography, a staggering 82% of Christians say, no one.
Isolation is the enemy's playground.
Stumble, the researcher said.
What does the Bible say about this?
Because some people say, well, pornography is not really a sin.
I'm not touching anybody.
We talked about it earlier.
Thoughts produce actions.
Actions produce habits.
Habits produce character, right?
So if you're into this, this is the problem.
Matthew 5.27 says, you have heard that it was said of them of all time, thou shall not commit adultery.
What is adultery?
It is to adulterate God's plan for sex and intimacy.
That's what adultery means.
You try and say, well, if you cheat on your wife,
It is to adulterate the plan God has made for you.
That's adultery in the realm of sex and sexuality.
Verse 28, but I say unto you that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her has committed adultery with her already where in his heart, where is sin actually happened in your mind?
Let me let you in on a secret.
The actual real sex organ is the brain.
Somebody missed that.
That's where it all happens is here.
What the Bible is saying, and Job has a great line.
I don't think I put a slide up on it.
Job has a great line where Job says, when his friends are accusing him of bringing this sin on himself, Job says, Job says, I have made a covenant with my eyes.
Why then should I look upon a maid?
Some of the translations of the Bible say it like this.
I've made a covenant with my eyes.
Why then would I look lustfully at a woman?
Sin happens in the mind.
And this is not just
Anybody talking who's talking here?
This is Jesus talking right?
So this is where sexual sin really lives.
It's the same place that Addiction lives the world where we talked about earlier Matthew 5 29 says and if I ride I offend thee Do what?
Pluck it out and cast it from you for it's profitable for there for thee that one of thy members should perish and not that thy whole body should be cast
into hell.
Now, is Jesus advocating you pluck out an eye?
Literally?
What happens if you pluck out one eye?
You still got one eye, you could be there, sinning with, you know?
It's not what he's talking about.
Jesus is saying to root out the part of you that desires that sin.
Because many times you'll say, this is who I am.
The sin is just an extension of me.
And Jesus said,
That has to be rooted out.
Right.
And so Jesus gives that advice.
Now let's look at this.
What porn does to your brain how to quit is an article that they made this image here.
Here's your brain.
Here's your brain on heroin.
Here's your brain on pornography.
Notice that just like we talked about drugs shrinking the brain, pornography also shrinks the brain.
Healthy volunteers, compulsive pornography users.
You see.
the way that the brain changes, right?
The actual structure of the brain changes.
And again, this is not some Christian source.
It's not a spirit of prophecy.
This is secular, modern science that does not inherently believe in God.
Neurosciencenews.com had this article watching pornography rewires the brain to a what?
A more juvenile state.
The changes that happen in the brain
function to actually make you, as a grown man, behave more like a child.
I hope you're getting this.
It reverses development and maturity.
And if it does that in terms of juvenile state, what do you think it does to your spiritual state?
Summary.
From eroding the prefrontal cortex, an area of the brain critical for impulse control, to damaging the dopamine reward system,
Researchers evaluate the impact of your pornography on the brain.
It damages the prefrontal cortex.
What goes in the prefrontal cortex we talked about this morning?
The seal of God, the name of God, the law of God.
If the devil can damage that part of your brain, you will have a hard time connecting with God.
And it gets deeper, right?
So pornography is a dangerous habit to get.
This is from that article that says,
In the long term, pornography seems to create sexual dysfunctions, especially the inability to achieve erection or orgasm with a real life partner.
Marital quality and commitment to one's romantic partner also appear to be compromised.
So you're doing this and you don't know.
And what you're doing is as if you are running up a credit card on your future happiness in the realm of marriage and intimacy.
You start doing this as a teenager.
and it begins and you don't know that 20 years from now you won't be able to function with a wife.
You have no idea the damage is being done physically.
Never mind the fact that as you do this and this fantasy world becomes the only understanding you have around sex and intimacy.
Now what happens is you get a real woman and there is no fantasy and you don't want it.
The devil
Curses your marriage before you even find the girl you're going to marry.
This again is secular research.
Pornography shrinks brain areas associated with motivation.
Does X-rated media make you lazy?
Right?
It actually shrinks part of brain that drives motivation.
So if you are having problems getting up and getting stuff done, sometimes part of that is
motivation is damaged.
Why?
I said it earlier, because it is dopamine release that you're trying to get from the pornography.
And if you overstimulate and damage that dopamine, the dopaminergic parts of the brain, what happens is it becomes, dopamine isn't just about pleasure.
It's also about motivation.
Now it's difficult for you to get the energy and motivation you need to go out and actually live life.
Causes you to retreat.
And that's part of the problem with this.
So what effects does pornography have on my brain?
Engaging with pornographic content prompts a significant release of dopamine in our brain.
The neurotransmitter often termed the pleasure molecule is responsible for feeling pleasure, reward, and motivation.
Here's a breakdown of the process.
Dopamine is from the article.
Dopamine released upon exposure to a rousing stimuli like porn.
There's an immediate surge in dopamine levels.
The surge provides a heightened sense
of excitement and satisfaction making the experience feel rewarding.
So you're watching this pornography, you're all excited, the dopamine is pouring.
But then there's this thing called the Coolidge Effect.
The constant novelty provided by different pornographic scenes triggers what is known as the Coolidge Effect.
Our brain's inherent attraction to new sexual imagery ensures that with every fresh scene, dopamine release is reignited perpetuating the cycle of arousal.
So you start watching it and you need new
material, often more advanced, more violent material, more trashy material, and you go into where you can get into some very dark spaces.
And let me, let me say this now so I don't forget.
If you remember the story of Bail Pior from the Old Testament where Bailam and Baila came together and set a trap for the children of Israel, it was sexual sin that kept them
from entering the Promised Land almost immediately after they left Egypt, right?
It was sexual sin that did that.
What you have to understand is that you are once again on the borders of the Promised Land, except this time it's the heavenly Canaan.
And so the devil is trying to wrap you up and by making this effect where it takes more and more and more and more, you become further and further and further distanced from the God of Heaven.
Article says this, neurochemical overload happens.
Continual engagement with pornographic content can lead to a state of overstimulation in the brain.
As pleasure-related neurochemicals become hyperactive, there's a risk of surpassing typical pleasure thresholds.
Over time, this can set damaging patterns in motion, desensitizing the brain to the other sources of pleasure and potentially leading to dependence on increasingly intense stimuli to achieve the same dopamine heights.
And so what actually ends up happening graphically is this.
You get down regulation.
Your body says there's too much dopamine, too much dopamine all the time.
So what your body does to protect you is it takes those receptors we talked about earlier and it starts to turn them off.
So there's less places for the dopamine to dock.
And guess what happens?
You want the same feeling now.
You got to get more dopamine.
And so you bring it out.
We talked about it today.
I call it disc dopaminergic syndrome.
And so you can see here what happens is
Option one, you see quick dopamine shots repeatedly, instant gratification happens, lower dopamine baseline, down regulation of pleasure.
Pleasure is less pleasant.
You see that?
So it takes more, more, more, more, more.
Option two, you engage in dopamine increasing activities and diminish instant gratification, right?
And so now you diminish the instant gratification, you actually get pleasure to be more pleasant.
This is probably one of the reasons that when we were talking about a second, married couples are often happier because there's a stopgap, but we'll come to that in a second.
One of the things that they talk about is the repeated drug exposure, Delta Phosphate, it messes with the plasticity of the brain.
And it talks about it, chronic overconsumption of pornography and massive overflow of dopamine causes a Delta Phosphate to accumulate in critical parts of your brain.
The Delta Phosphate brings significant physical changes to the brain beginning with hyper reactivity to specific cues that affects the brain reward circuits to developing addiction.
A new cycle is developed where Delta Phosphate makes you over consume internet pornography, which would in turn increase the layers of Delta Phosphate in the new rewiring would create more physical changes in the brain, making you even more dependent on pornography.
It is an actual trap.
What else happens when you're watching this porn for boys?
The hypothalamus activates the testes to secrete testosterone and sexually explicit material crafts a brain that is constantly generating testosterone and heightened sexual desire.
Instead of allowing boys to focus on school sports and music, sexually explicit material causes a ramped up sex drive where their minds are inundated with sexual thoughts.
In other words, it turns boys
into perverts.
There's a reason when you get a job.
Some of you may not have gotten a real job yet.
The reason you get a job, one of the trainings they give you is around sexual harassment.
In fact, most jobs, they make you take that training, what?
Once a year.
And you would ask in a civilized society, why do you need to do that?
If you're watching it like this, it makes sense.
It's because for many people, if you get exposed to this stuff, it is difficult to unbler the line.
You come to work and you see someone you're attracted to and you don't have the brakes.
Your dopamine system is so messed up.
You don't have the brakes to behave.
And just recently at the football program in Michigan, we saw the former head of the chief, the head coach of the Houston Rockets.
I don't want to name their names, but you can go through.
See these men fall and lose everything because they can't press the brakes.
They can't stop.
Sexual behavior just kind of controls them.
So you look at this one, sexual addiction, right?
It starts with fantasy, goes to ritual.
You start to act out.
That brings you to shame.
And the shame makes you want more fantasy.
I am telling you that if you are a Christian, it is shame.
Sometimes it's not that you start.
And so we're going to jump a little bit into how you begin to reverse these behaviors.
Sometimes it's not about trying to stop the behavior.
It's about stopping the shame.
You can pick where on the cycle you break.
And I would argue as a Christian, understanding the doctrine of justification that many times the place you ought to stop is to stop the shame part of it.
We'll come back to that.
But it's a way that you can do it where you can fight the devil before you even begin to fight the battle around the actual behavior.
Hello, I says the work of the enemy is not abrupt.
It is not at the outset, sudden and startling.
It is a secret undermining of the strongholds of principle.
He starts just letting you watch simple stuff.
And when I do full presentations on just this, I go all the way back to TV back in the sixties and seventies, right?
I mean, when you go back to Ricky Ricardo show, Lila of Lucy,
They had two separate beds on the TV show.
In America, you couldn't even show a married couple in the same bed.
Then you move to the next day, married couples in the same bed.
Until you get to TV shows that are considered wholesome even in hindsight, like Happy Days.
Some of y'all might remember Happy Days with Richie Cunningham and the Fonz, Arthur Fonzarelli.
But what did it really teach young boys?
The Fonz always had a different girl every show.
Some shows he had a girl on each arm.
And he was the cool guy and everybody else were nerds.
Young men were trained to believe just like Balaam told Baelic to get the children of Israel at Bael Pior, American men were trained to believe that if they are hypersexual, they are stronger, better men.
Let me tell you, let you in on a secret.
The stronger man can control his desires.
It's not strength that you sleep with a whole bunch of women.
That's weakness.
Real strength is you follow what God says,
One day you marry a woman and you treat her like a queen and ignore all others.
That takes strength, strength that comes from knowing Christ and not allowing yourself to be corrupted.
First Corinthians 10, 13 says, there has no temptation taking you, but such as is common to man, but God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape.
that you may be able to bear it.
I came to tell you today that whatever the temptation you are suffering, God has made a way of escape.
Romans eight, six again, for to be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is life and peace.
I'm going to jump ahead a little bit again about how we deal with this.
What a lot of times we do is we focus on our behavior, we even define ourselves by our behavior.
We start to do that.
And that's what the devil wants.
He wants you to be your behavior.
Because as long as you and your sin are one, sin is going to be destroyed.
If you attach to your sin, that's how you get destroyed.
God isn't looking to destroy you.
He's looking to destroy sin.
Right?
So the devil convinces you.
Well, here's what I came to tell you.
You can't focus on what you've done or where you've been.
You've got to focus on what he's done and is doing for you.
The whole equation has to shift.
Because the more you look at what you've done, the more like what you've done, you become.
By beholding, you become changed.
So you got to change the way you look at this whole thing from a very Christian perspective.
Eloise says, from the beginning, Satan has portrayed tremendous gains to be won by transgression.
Thus he seduced angels.
Thus he tempted Adam and Eve to sin.
And thus he is still leading multitudes away from obedience to God.
The path of transgression is made to appear desirable, but the end thereof are the what?
Ways of death.
Happy, they who have ventured in this way, learn how bitter are the fruits of sin and turn from it.
God in his mercy did not leave David to be learned to utter ruin by the deceitful rewards of sin.
You have got to learn to turn away from sin.
And let me jump here.
So what happens is, I want to step back from pornography alone now, and really look at a bit about another form of habit, maybe even addiction, that happens in dating.
One of the things that happens to young men, this is what happens to anybody who gets a strong crush.
If you get a really strong crush on someone else, there are parts of your brain that are switched off.
One of them is the amygdala.
What does the amygdala do?
It is what tells you to be afraid.
Right?
Um, let me, let me put it in a list.
The mid temporal cortex controls negative emotions.
The frontal lobe controls judgment.
When you say you're in love, when you think you have this big crush on somebody, what happens is key parts of your brain are turned off.
This is why they say love is blind.
And I'm telling you, I've seen it.
I've seen girls.
Oh pastor, that guy is so cute.
And you look over to do say,
I don't know, that brother looked like he was about to knock off a liquor store or a bank.
I'm not sure I'd be, you should be afraid.
I'm afraid.
Why aren't you afraid?
Right?
You don't see the warning signs, the negative emotions.
And here's where it gets like an addictive pattern.
You get a crush, and I'm talking to a much more innocent than what we've been talking about.
You get a crush on someone, that feel good you get.
Let me tell you what I remember back in high school.
Some of y'all might still be in high school.
And you walking down the hall, and you got that crush on that girl, all of a sudden the tile on the floor feel like you walking on clouds.
Somebody open their locker, and butterflies come out the locker in the middle of this hallway.
You go to class, you can hear birds singing instead of the teacher talking.
Right?
Because the mid temporal cortex that controls negative emotions switch off.
So you just get this rush of good emotions.
Watch this.
If you are in a home where you do not feel love and you get this fuzzy feeling, you can get caught up quote unquote addicted to it.
And so what happens to some folk and especially young men, when they, the feeling of the chase, the feeling of going after the girl is what they actually get addicted to.
It has nothing to do with the girl.
And hence girls talk to girls and say, listen, I don't know why he can't commit.
We've been talking for six years, seven years.
He still can't commit to nothing because he still wants the high he gets from the chase.
Right now, watch this.
So once sex comes into the picture, it flips an even deeper switch in the brain.
So we talked about fantasy, pornography,
We just talked briefly about crushes.
I do longer stuff on that.
That's actually pretty fascinating how the brain reacts and why you want to do it God's way.
You want all of that feeling to come rushing in as you're getting married and come to its zenith when you are on your honeymoon or shortly thereafter.
That's what you really want because that binds you to the person.
And that's what the Bible says.
The two become one flesh.
The problem if you're sleeping around with everybody,
You become in one flesh with everybody.
And the time comes for you to be one flesh with a spouse.
There's not much of you left.
And there's too much everybody else on you.
So when you do this, now you really get caught up.
And this is how it happens.
So this is actually the stage all the way through to orgasm.
And I want to show you that dopamine is offset by prolactin, right?
So the dopamine gives you the feeling of pleasure and arousal.
Oxytocin is a part of what happens when you orgasm.
And what oxytocin, when you orgasm what it does is it connects you to the person.
Oxytocin is also the chemical that a woman releases when she nurses a child.
Oxytocin is released and that's what bonds the mother to the child.
When a man, then people say this about men, that chemical oxytocin, they say is that this is the monogamy
neuro-hormonal function, or hormone, oxytocin.
It is what binds a man to a woman.
So when you get married and you've not been with anybody else and you sleep with a woman, oxytocin is released and you bond to your wife.
And it's a real bond.
The two become one flesh.
That's how it happens physiologically.
Of course, there's a release of testosterone.
And serotonin is released, which makes you feel satisfied.
And if you do all of this inside of marriage, it just works so much better.
Everything works.
You see the opiates, all of this stuff is playing through.
And ultimately, you're designed when you sleep with someone to bond with the person.
If you're not careful, I want you to see, as you look up here, Nora Epinephrine.
You see the Nora Epinephrine?
Nora Epinephrine is related to adrenaline.
It's also called Nora adrenaline.
So you get adrenaline rush with the arousal and the chase.
If you sleep with too many people, what happens after a while is what you're after is the noradrenaline dopamine rush, which is after you've slept around better in the chase than it is in the stability of a marriage.
And hence you get people who become addicted to lots and lots of different people sleeping all around.
Pornography overstimulates prolactin by producing unnatural dopamine spikes, forcing repeated hormonal shutdowns that suppress motivation, clarity, and drive.
What does Jesus say?
Mark 10, 6.
But from the beginning of the creation, God made them what?
Male and female.
For this cause, the Bible says, shall a man leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh.
So then they are not no more twain, no more two, but one flesh.
Here's what God says, in verse nine, what therefore God has joined together, let no man put us under.
What the devil wants you to do by addictive, lustful behavior is get you to be joined to someone God never had any intention for you to join up with.
That's the devil's game plan.
In fact, Ellen White has a great quote.
I think it's in the book, Letters to Young Lovers.
She says, this is Satan's primary work because he knows he can reap
Nothing he can do can create more misery in your life than to get you to marry the wrong person.
And what makes you marry the wrong person when it is a sexual thing rather than a spiritual one?
When you are with her because of how she's shaped rather than how Christ has shaped her.
That's what does it.
And then what happens is because all these chemicals are going off in your brain.
You are living in this emotions, negative emotions shut off.
You're living in the middle of therapy and shut off.
All this stuff is happening.
You are so high.
You're so caught up.
And what your relationship really is, is a sexual relationship.
And the day you wake up two years, three years after you're married, or you've been living together for four or five years, you wake up one day and realize, not only do I not know the person next to me, I don't like them.
Hence you have the high divorce rates.
I grew up in Connecticut, born and raised.
And in Connecticut we have ethnic groups that have strong families.
In Connecticut, Irish, Polish, Italians.
If you find those old families, let's say the Polish and the Italians, I would take care of patients.
And you see people coming there like, they've been married for 40 years, 50 years, 60 years.
And you're like, whoa, you don't see that anywhere anymore.
And when you talk to them,
Many of the men will say, the only woman's hand I ever held is hers.
The only woman I ever kissed was hers.
I saw that some when I went to Cali and with some of the Mexican of American families too.
Family that are tight.
But when you're Americanized, you think what you're supposed to do with your sleep with everybody, you don't realize you ruin your happily ever after.
You sell your happily ever after.
And you don't ever get what God would have actually had for you because you gave it up on the altar of lust.
How pornography addiction harms the theta waves.
Talk about theta waves earlier.
Won't get into it too deep.
We'll talk more about it tomorrow.
Causes hypofrontality means the front of low begins to shrink, distorts reality.
You know, and you've got to have the brain recover.
We'll talk about that in a second.
I will remind you again,
The statement applies to sexual sin like it did apply to other addictions.
God made the human heart so big, only he can fill it.
And let me, you know what?
I might as well do it.
I'm gonna give some relationship advice.
Ain't really part of the talk, but let's just do it.
Here's the reality.
Too many people looking to get married to become complete.
They wanna get married to fix their brokenness.
Let me let you in on a secret.
Two broken people getting married just mean you got more pieces in the house.
Two broken people get married.
There's more people, more peace in the house.
You have got to get married when you are whole.
And you know, make sure you marry someone else who's whole.
Too many times we, what we see, what they look like and we think what they look like is their value.
I want to warn you that even God said, man looks at the outward appearance.
God looks at the heart.
If God is looking at the heart, you better look at the heart.
The heart is the mind.
You think the devil don't know young ladies?
You don't think the devil know what kind of man you like?
You don't think you know how to send a man with a dimple in his chin and broad shoulders and curly hair and whatever it is you like?
You don't think the devil can find a man like that for you?
If you don't run him through the checkpoint of knowing Christ Jesus first and most, you may sign yourself for a dimple chin devil.
Spend the rest of your life wishing him and his dimple would find somewhere else to go.
You see, sexual sin is self worship.
Sexual sin says what I want is more important than God.
That's why I second Timothy chapter three.
We read it earlier.
That's why it says lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God and idol is anything more important to you than God.
Talk to a young man skipping church because he can't get away from the pornography long enough to sit in church.
Barely can get to class.
You begin to worship these things.
And let me tell you what happens.
Again, not part of the talk, but I might as well just throw it all in there now.
We read this deep.
Once you begin to go outside of God in the realm of sex and sexuality, it creates a division and a separation from you and God.
The Bible says that sexual sin is the only sin you commit, and it's against your own body.
And if your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit, and you're sinning against that temple, where does the Holy Spirit find space to work on you?
So sexual sin, and let me tell you something.
We keep talking, we're just talking about, I have cousins, you know, my family's Jamaican, so we have cousins in the UK, Canada all over the place.
And I was talking to some of my cousins in the UK, and we're talking about church in the UK.
And I'll talk actually to the pastors here from the UK as well about this.
And you will see the generations, the first generation of Jamaicans, all of them are still in church.
The next generation, most of their kids are in church.
Once you get to the next generation, the generation after that, in the UK, nobody's in church.
You look at the United States, look at the aging.
In 1965, the average age in the Adventist church was 35.
By 1999, 1998, whatever, late 90s, the average age in the Adventist church was 65.
Let me tell you, you know why I love GYC?
Because so many y'all under 35 are in here.
And we need you here.
One of the ways the devil makes it so you do not want to stay in church is to get you to start having a sex life outside of God's plan.
And a lot of people, they have not left the church because they disagree with the church.
But because they have sinned in a way that has separated them from God.
And then there's shame.
And then when they come to church, they'll say, you don't belong here.
What are my good friends in Miami?
I'll just preach in Miami.
I've been in Florida about two weeks now.
I was in Miami, preached out of Miami and I called them to come to church.
I said, man, you got to come to church.
That brother said, listen, I'm living so foul right now.
If I came to church, it would blow up.
I says, all right, we got fire extinguisher says that the church, come on over.
Sexual sin is self worship.
You are saying what I want is more important than what God wants.
My desire is more important than God's desire.
And once you say that, you begin to separate from him.
That's literally what begins to happen.
But I want to submit to you that God has a better plan.
a better plan in the world when it comes to sex and intimacy.
Let me show you this study.
According to a national poll of 1001 married Americans, commissioned by Parade Magazine, and this is an article from 2008, about 88% of Americans say they are happily or reasonably content with their married sex.
And three quarters report that their sex lives are reasonably fulfilling.
Here's what the lessons they got from the study.
Sex is better in marriage.
Sex is better between, among religious or spiritual couples.
Sex is not better if you cohabitate and you're not married.
You just living together.
1,001 couples.
They looked at, and this is what they found.
Let me tell you something.
God's way is the best way.
That's the truth.
And what the devil wants is to set you up
so that this tension, and one of the things, I remember when I went to Israel, and I studied Jewish history for one semester in Israel, and they were telling me that one of the primary reasons, more dangerous than any of the things that have threatened the Jewish people in the world, is the fact that they marry outside of Judaism and leave.
My professor there said that is one of the biggest threats, and now I look at our church, and I think that's one of the biggest threats to our church too.
People think, you know what I mean?
My friends, I grew up in church.
I knew a guy so strong in the Lord.
And then they fell in love with someone who did not know the Lord, did not know the truth, did not know the teachings.
And eventually, a lot of times the person would convert, take the Bible study and convert.
And again, two, three years later when they wake up, I don't like you and I don't like your God.
I don't like the way you worship.
I don't like your Sabbath.
I don't like your prophet.
I don't like none of it.
And guess what most of those men do?
follow out.
Who you marry is critical and how you make that decision is affected by whether or not you're watching an addicted to pornography today.
I was in, I was in, I was on the West coast.
I don't even say which state I was on the West cause there's only three states on the West coast.
So y'all can figure it out.
I was on the West coast and I spoke for a youth event and a little boy, he couldn't have been more than 10, 11, 12 years old, just a little boy.
After I presented our pornography, he came over and he leaned into me as I was at the door in the foyer of the church.
And he leaned into me and said, I'm so glad.
Pastor, I'm so glad you talked about pornography.
I said, thank you, young man.
He said, because so many of my friends watch it.
He said, man, and it seems like they can't stop watching it.
Then his voice gets even more quiet.
He leans in further and he says, and I can't stop watching it either.
And he said, thank you because at least you talked about it.
Let me tell you something.
We're going to talk about this in the next session.
We're going to take a 10 minute break here in a second, but we're going to come back to it.
I have learned that there is nothing, no chain, no bondage that Satan can put on you that Christ can't take off.
In fact, if you really want to experience God's love,
Here's how Jesus, the Bible says it, the love of Christ, constrain of us.
There are a lot of people that have this false, false doctrine going on called love reality.
You know, I might have heard it.
It is a false doctrine that, you know, you can just live however you want.
God loves you so much, you'll never be punished for it.
That is a lie from the pits of hell.
Don't we believe that foolishness?
Read your Bible before you have to buy that lie.
Does he love you?
Absolutely.
Does he want to destroy you?
He does not.
He wants you saved.
In fact, the Bible says, God says in the Old Testament, in the Old Testament, He says, I gave no pleasure from the destruction of the wicked, but that the wicked will repent and live.
Right.
God does not want you destroyed.
God wants you to live.
But you have to choose him.
You've got to make a decision that Christ comes first before everything else.
And what you've got to realize a lot of what we're talking about, one of the reasons it's so hard to break it is because the devil knows how to micro dose sexual sin.
I'm going to say it again.
He can micro dose it.
So you say I'm going to give a pornography, but you still watch Netflix.
And so now you're watching a movie on Netflix with a sexy, you know, stars and one of them other things, you watching that sexy, you don't realize Satan has figured out, yeah, you trying to get off, but I'm going to give you some low dose spiritual nicotine.
I'm going to give it to you in low dose to keep you addicted.
You say, I want to give up this stuff, but I'm going to keep listening to all of this filthy music.
And you don't realize you can't listen to Cardi B.
And I don't know how you say her name.
I think it's Megan Thee Stallion and all these people.
These people make music so raunchy it make Rick James them from back in the day blush is raunchy.
It is over sexualized.
And you think you can listen to that stuff and it not affect you.
I have talks where I show you from the journal of pediatrics, secular journals.
If you listen to it, it changes how you behave.
If you want to be free, you got to stop feeding the thing that's binding you.
You got to make a decision that I'm going to live for Christ, which means the decision you can make is I am going to stop feeding the flesh.
And I'm going to start feeding the spirit.
And I learned there's only one way to really break the chains.
Morris Vendon talks about it.
If you ever read Morris Vendon, he has a great devotional this year.
It'd be a good year for you to go get it.
A faith that works.
Powerful devotional.
And one of the things Morris Vendon, former pastor down in Southern California, Morris Vendon says something powerful.
He says, really, the secret to breaking the chain of sin is not to look at the sin or yourself or your weakness or your failures, it is to look to Christ.
And what a lot of people do is they, you know, if you go, I was just with a buddy and he was, he was telling me how terrible Christmas is.
I said, okay, all right.
I mean, I'm not sure what you want me to do with that.
You don't have to celebrate Christmas.
I'm not a big Christmas fan either, but whatever.
But if you are not focusing on Christ, change comes when you look at him.
And the whole hymn says it like this, turn your eyes upon Jesus, look full in his wonderful face and the things of earth will grow strangely dim in the light of his glory and grace.
You will not gain victory if you're not looking Jesus in the face.
Somebody say, how do you practically look Jesus in the face?
You start with the book of John, the gospel of John.
In fact, many times we want to give people Bible study.
We get all excited.
We want to show them the mark of the beast and Daniel seven.
And I love all that stuff.
You hear me preach.
I preach while all that stuff.
But I'll tell you what, I don't want anybody to know about any marks of beasts if they don't know Jesus.
The whole bunch of times I will wait on the prophecy, wait on the other doctrines.
And I say, listen, you need to see the character of God.
Cause here's the thing.
All the doctrines make more sense once you know God's character.
They have all more meaning.
And the reason many will not make it through the time of trouble is because they don't know God's character.
And I want to submit to you that the secret to breaking the chains is to leverage his character.
Look into his face.
See what he did for you on the cross.
Read Matthew chapter 27, when Roger Bernard came out of demon worship and the demons kept coming after him.
The demons were assaulting him.
The demons were trying to destroy him.
Roger Minot says, in order to beat the demons, he would read out loud at night the story of the crucifixion out of Matthew 27.
And when the demons would hear the story of how they lost eternally their place in glory, the demons would flee.
I'm challenging you.
There is a weapon for you to use.
And it is the word of God.
So after the break, we're going to come back.
And that's what we're going to talk about.
Let's pray.
Father God, we thank you for this opportunity to study a word and to deal with these
heavy issues and now Lord as we transition into not just what is wrong but Lord how you make it right.
I am asking for Holy Ghost power for that Lord.
And I pray that those that are here and have been convicted of any of the stuff we're talking about Lord, I'm praying now today realize you have not forsaken them.
You have not thrown them away.
Their sins have not caused you to love them any less.
But that what they would realize is you have such great power in your love that you can set them free.
Father, God let freedom be what we find as we go further into these studies.
This is our prayer in Jesus' name, amen.
This media was produced by Audioverse for GYC, Generation Youth Christ.
If you would like to learn more about GYC, please visit gycweb.org.
Or if you would like to listen to more sermons, download the free Audioverse app or visit audioverse.org.